# Topics covered - 
1. Parliament officers and its devices(motions, discussions,)
# NOTES starts here -
## Polity
### vancancy
1. if a person got elected to both parliament and state assembly, if he doesnot choose within 14 days, his seat in the parl. becomes vacant.
2. absence - from all meetings for 60 days without permission.
3. if a disqualified person wins the election HC are empowered to declare the election viod.(RPA 1951)
4. MP take oath before POI or person appointed by him.
### Speaker
1. elected
2. if vacancy, election ..
3. date of election - president.
4. resignation letter - deputy speaker
5. no separate oath
6. removal - 
	1. motion needs support of > 50 members.
	2. 14 days notice
	3. resolution by effective majority.
	4. can vote during the removal resolution consideration.
7. principal spokesperson of the house.
8. powers under
	1. COI
	2. rules of procedure and conduct of Business of LS
	3. parliamentary conventions
9. kihoto hollohan case 1992 -> speaker's decision in disqualification of an MP in defection cases -> subject to JR.
10. chairman of indian parliamentary group
11. ex-officio chairman of the conference of presiding officers of legislative bodies in the country.
12. appoints chairman of all parl. committees.
13. chairman of - 
	1. business advisory committee
	2. rules committee
	3. general purpose committee.
14. placed in 7th rank, with CJI.
15. his conduct can not be discussed and criticised in the Lok sabha.

### deputy speaker
1. date of election fixed by **speaker**
2. no separate oath
3. removal process == speaker
4. acts as speaker - in case of 
	1. vancancy
	2. absence
5. not subordinate to speaker
6. directly resoponsible to the house.
7. if appointed a member of any parliamentary committee -> automatic chairman.
8. by convention - of opposition
9. last two LS -> non-appointment.

### panel of charipersons (LS)
1. speaker nominates <= 10 members
2. act as speakerin case of 
	1. absence of speaker and deputy speaker
3. can not in the case of vacancy of both
	1. member appointed by the POI.
### speaker pro tem
1. appointed by the POI
2. generally the senior most member
3. **oath by POI**
4. presides over the first sitting
5. administer oath to the new members.
6. enables the house to elect new speaker.

### chariman of RS
1. can not vote in **first instance** ever.
2. removal -> only if removed as Vice president.
	1. 14 days advance notice
	2. motion only in RS
	3. RS -> effective majority
	4. LS -> simple majority.
### Deputy chairman
1. elected by RS
2. removal  == chairman
3. resignation letter - chairman.
4. acts as chairman of RS in case of 
	1. vacancy
	2. absence of chairman.
5. not subordinate to the chairman
6. directly responsible to the RS.
### panel of vice-chairpersons of RS
1. like panel of chairpersons of LS

### leader of the house
1. either the PM
2. or any **minister** nominated by PM
### leader of the opposition
1. statutory status in 1977
2. leader of the largest **political party** in opposition.
3. condition for recognition as a political party -> 1/10 seats
### whips
1. chief whip of govt party in LS - minister of parliamentary affairs
2. chief whip of govt party in RS - MoS of parliamentary affairs.
3. chief whip directly responsible to the leader of the house.
### sessions
1. max gap = 6 months
2. Budget session(feb to may)
3. Monsoon session(july to sept)
4. winter session(Nov to Dec)
#### adjournment -
- termination of a sitting of the house for a specified time
#### adjournment sine die
- termination of a sitting of the house for indefinite period
#### Prorogation
- done by POI
- ends the session
- no pending bills lapse
- but all  pending notices lapse(except regarding intro. of bills.)
#### dissolution
- either automatic of expiry of life or by POI
- all bills, notices.. lapses. except
	1. bill pending in RS, not passed by LS
	2. bill not passed by the two houses due to disagreement and joint sitting has been called by POI
	3. bill pending for the assent of the POI
	4. bill sent by the POI for reconsideration
### special majority I
1. mojority of the total membership + 2/3 of the present and voting (of each house)
2. for - 
	1. removal of judges of SC, HC
	2. removal of CAG
	3. removal of CEC and state election commissioner
	4. approval of proclamation of national emergency
### special majority II
1. 2/3rd majority of total membership of each hosue.
2. for impeachment of POI
### special majority III
1. 2/3rd majority of present and voting
2. for (in RS) -
	1. parliamentary legislation on state list sub(art 249)
	2. recommendation of creation of new all india services(art 312)

### Question hour
1. first hour of sitting
2. questions - 
	1. starred - answered orally, suplementary questions ...
	2. un starred - written answer
	3. short notice - answered orally within 10 days
3. included in the rules of procedrue

### zero hour
1. not included in the rules of procedure
2. indian innovation since 1962
3. time gap between question hour and adoption of the agenda of the day.
### motions
1. substantive motion - self contained, having very important matters like impeachment of the POI, or removal of CEC
2. substitute motion  - moved in substitution of an original motion, if adopted, supersedes the original motion
3. subsidiary motion = no indepedent meaning, in reference to another motion.. or proceeding...
	1. ancillary motion - used as regular way of proceeding
	2. superseding motion - moved in the course of debate on another issue and seeks to supersede that issue
	3. amendment  : to modify or substitute only a part of the original motion.
#### closure motion
1. to close / end the discussion on a resolution and put to vote
2. types - 
	1. simple closure - after sufficient discussion
	2. closure by compartments - large bill -> parts -> parts discussed as a whole, and voted.
	3. kangaroo closure - important clauses of the bill are discussed and voted, and remaining are taken as passed
	4. guillotine closure - undiscussed clauses of a bill are voted along with the discussed ones, for want of time.
#### privilege motion
1. by a member against a minister
2. for breach of parliamentary privilege
3. by withholding important facts or giving wrong facts.
#### calling attention motion
1. by a member against a minister to draw their attention towards a matter of urgent public importance
2. seek to have an authoritative statement, from the govt.
3. indian innovation, since 1954
4. included in rules of procedures.
#### adjournment motion
1. to adjourn the current proceedings to draw attention of the house towards a **definite matter of urgent public importance.**
2. only **lok sabha**
3. needs support of 50 members for admission.
4. discussion > 2.5 hrs.
5. conditions - 
	1. specific matter of recent occurance  and not in general terms
	2. urgency...
	3. not > 1 matter
	4. not a matter discussed in the same session.
#### no-confidence motion
1. against COM
2. if passed -> govt falls
3. needs support of 50 members for admission.
#### confidence motion
1. by the govt.
2. if not passed -> govt falls
#### censure motion
1. for censuring a minister or COM for any policy or action
2. does not amount to fall of govt.
3. need to state the reason for adoption
#### motion of thanks
1. first sitting of a new LS, of a new financial yr -> president's address -> discussed in "motion of thanks"
2. must pass , if negated -> fall of govt.
#### dilatory motion
1. for adjournment of a debate on bill/motion... to retard or delay of the business under consideration of the house.

### point of order
1. by a member when proceedings do not follow the general rules of procedure.
2. no debate.
### half an hour discussion
1. for discussion of public importance that has been extensively debated and answer to which needs elucidation of matter of fact
2. no formal motion or voting
### short duration discussion
1. also k/a two hour discussion as discussion < 2 hrs.
2. no formal motion or voting.
### special mention
1. any matter than can not be discussed under -
	1. half an hour discussion 
	2. short duration discussion
	3. question hour
	4. adjournment motion
	5. calling attention notice...
can be raised under special mention in RS.
### youth parliament
1. on the recommendation of forth all india whips conference.
2. Min of parliamentary affairs.
### deadlock
1. if second house rejects the bill
2. if first house rejects the amendments proposed by the second house
3. if second house does not take any action for 6 months
this is in case of ordinary bills, a Joint sitting is summoned by the POI
