## polity
### centre's direction to the state
1. for establishment and maintenance of means of communication(of national importance)
2. est. and maint... of railway
3. for welfare of scheduled tribes...
4. for primary education in mother tongue to children of linguistic minority grps
5. for all these matters failure to comply may lead to actions under art 365 -> 356...
### mutual delegation of powers
1. president with prior consent of state govt, can delegate it's executive powers to the state
2. governor with prior consent of central govt. can delegate it's executive powers to the centre([[7th CAA]] 1956)
3. **Parliament** without consent of the state govt can delegate executive powers of centre to a state.(not vice versa)
### co-operation between both
1. center can provide for adjudication on the matters of inter-state rivers, water disputes and river valleys(art 262)
2. center can make a inter-state council(under art 263) to discuss and manage the subjects of common concern. such council made in 1990.
3. center can establish appropriate authority to implement consti. provisions of freedom of inter state trade and commerce
### PSC
1. center may establish a Joint state public service commission if the state legislatures passes such resolution
2. chairman and members of SPSCs are appointed by the governor but can be removed only by the POI
3. UPSC can serve for any state if that state's legislature ask for it + approval of the POI
4. UPSC assists(when asked by 2 or more) states in recruiting special knowledge persons..
### regarding HC
1. judges of HC are appointed by the POI with consultation with CJI and State governor.
2. paliament can establish a common HC for >1 states or UTs
### emergency provisions
1. during national emergency center can give directions to the states on any matter
2. during prez rule, Prez can assume all the powers of governor in him/herself.
3. during financial emergency, center can give directions to the states including reduction of salaries of state's employees., and reservation of all financial bills for POI's consideration
### otherr
1. state election commissioner though appointed by the governor can be removed only by the POI
2. under art 355 center have two duties
	1. to protect the state from any external aggration or internal disturbances
	2. to ensure that the govt is being carried out according to the provisions in the COI.
### allocation of taxing powers
1. union list and state list but no concurrent list
2. 101st CAA - GST - concurrent powers
3. residual powers with center.
4. state can impose taxes on professionals, employments etc, max 2500 per year.
5. state can not tax on supply of G&S if such supply occurs outside of the state or if it is a part of Import/Export.
6. state can tax on electricity sales but not on 
	1. that sold to / used by union
	2. used in railway 
7. a state can impose taxes on any water / electricity generated, consumed ... by any authority established by parl. for regulating or developing any inter-state river or river valley -> but such a law needs to be reserved for the consideration of the POI and recieve assent.
### 80th CAA 2000
1. gave effect to the 10th finance commission recommendations
2. out of the total tax revenue of the center 29% should go to the states.
### types of grants-in-aid
1. statutory grants - 
	1. art 275
	2. to states in financial needs
	3. general grants + specific grants for development of tribals
	4. given on recommendation of finance commission
2. discretionary grants
	1. under art 282
	2. center have full discretion regarding these.
	3. for any purpose even if it does not lies in their legislative competence.
### GST council 
1. art 279-A - president can cosntitute 
2. recommend - 
	1. taxes to be subsumed 
	2. goods and services to be included and excluded
	3. threshold limit of turnover below which G&S may be exempted from GST.
	4. model law ,principles of levy, inter-state trade....
	5. rates and bands
### finance commssion 
1. art 280
2. horizontal and vertical distribution of tax revenues
3. principles for grants-in-aid.
4. measures to augment the consolidated fund of states to supplement the panchayat and municipalities' funds on the basis of  recommended by state finance commission.
### president's recommendation for key bills
1. imposing or varying taxes in which states are interested
2. chages the meaning of "agriculture income" for the purpose of income tax..
3. changes principles on which money is to be distributed to the states.
4. bill imposing cess and surcharge on taxes of center.
### inter govtal tax exemptions
1. state can not tax any property of the centre, this does not include corporations and companies, else everything that has a monetary value is included.
	1. parliament can remove this ban
2. center can not tax, properties of state,
	1. property and income of local authorities are not exempted under this.
	2. also tax does not include custom and excise duties.

in case of national emergency (art 352) center can reduce or cancel the financial transfers to the states.

### recommendations of sarkaria commission
setup in 1983 -> reported in 1988
in general found constitutional provisions to be sound, and advocated for operational and functional federalism.
1. establishment of an inter-state council under art 263.
2. use of art 356 sparingly.
3. governor can not dismiss the COM until it enjoys majority in the assembly.
4. institution of All-India-Services should be further strengthened. and such more services should be created.
5. center should consult states before making law on concurrent list subjects
6. center should have the power to deploy armed forces even without state's permission, but state should be consulted.
7. when POI withholds assent to the state bills reserved for his consideration, reason should be communicated to the state.
8. NDC -> renamed and reconstituted as National Economic and Development council.
9. the procedure of  consulting CM in appointment of Governor should be included in the constitution itself.
10. governor's term of five yrs should not be changed except for extremely compelling reasons.
11. no commission for inquiry of a state minister should be set up unless demand is made by parliament.
12. surcharge on income tax should be minimal, specific and for limited time period.
13. division of functions between the finance commission and planning commission is resonable and should be continued.
14. no change in the role of RS and center's power to restructure states.

### Punchhi commission
set up in 2007
report submitted in 2010
1. governor should be given a fixed term of 5 yrs, method of impeachment of POI, can be provided for the governors also
2. center should re-consider its cess and surcharges to minimize their share in net tax receipts.
3. co-ordination and synchronisation between FC and PC.
4. more All india services in spheres of education , health, engineering, judiciary etc.
5. role of governors to be chancellors of the universities should be done away with, their role should be confined to the govtal role.
6. responsibilities and powers of local govts, like panchayats and municipalities should be included in the constitution itself.
7. constitution of an inter-state trade and commerse commission as constitutional body, appeals to which lies in the SC
8. max time limit of 6 months for state legislature to act on a bill returned by the POI(art 201),  can be set for the governors and POI also.
9. in case of no clear majority of a party in the elections, governor's decision to call a party or group to make govt should be based on certain rules and not arbitrary.
10. governor's discretion under [[Article 163]] should not be arbitrary, but reasonable, and fair.\
11. governor should give a time limit to the CM to prove his majority on the floor before dismissing him.
12. center and states should have a broad agreement before parliament passing a bill on concurrent list.
13. center should be extremely restrained in asserting parliamentary supremacy in matters assigned to states. and should provide greater flexibility to the states to legislate on the state list sub.s.
14. all future central legislation concerning state's involvment, should provide for cost-sharing.
15. the royalty rates on major minerals to be revised at least every 3 yrs.
16. limitations on profession tax should be done away with a CA.

### inter-state water disputes
1. art 262 empowers the parliament to provide for the adjudication for the disputes regarding use, distribution or control of inter-state rivers waters and valleys.
2. parliament can by law, restrict any of the SC or HC the jurisdiction over these issues.
parliament enacted two acts - 
3. River Boards Act 1956
4. inter-state River water dispute  act 1956
5. under 1st act parliament can establish river boards on the request of the states to advise them regarding river water management.
6. under 2nd act parliament has established various tribunals, and restricted the appellate jurisdiction of any otheer court(including SC) on inter-state river water disputes, for matters that may be referred to  such tribunals.
### inter-state councils.
1. art 263 provide for its establishment.
2. first time established in 1990 on recommendations of [[Sarkaria commission]] 1987.
3. consists of - 
	1. PM (chairman)
	2. CMs of states
	3. CMs of UTs with legislature
	4. Administrators of UTs without legislature
	5. governors of states under Prezs' rule
	6. 6 union ministers includin Home minister chosen by PM.
4. enquires and advise on the disputes or issues betweeen states, or center and states.
5. this powers is complementary to the Power of SC under art 131(to decide on legal controvercies between govts)
6. assisted by inter-state council secretariat -> since 2011 -> also secretariat of zonal councils