
# Topics covered - 


# NOTES starts here -
### money bills
1. art 110 - bill consists matter **only** related to - 
	1. regarding taxes 
	2. borrowing of money by govt
	3. custody of CFI, or contingency fund of india, money in/out of these funds
	4. appropriation from CFI
	5. regarding charged expenditures
	6. receipts in CFI, PFI, and its custody, issue, **audit**
2. not for
	1. fees, fines, ...
	2. taxes by local authority
3. introduction only in LS
4. by a minister
5. on recommendation of President.
6. RS to return the bill < 14 days.

### financial bills
1. all money bills are financial bills
#### financial bill (I) 
1. contain matter relating to art 110, along with other matters of general nature
2. introduction only in LS
3. on the recommendation of POI
4. rest = ordinary bills
	1. RS can reject or amend the bill,
		1. amendments reducing/aboliting taxes, need not POI's recommendation, others requrie
#### financial bill (II)
1. contains expenditure from the CFI, but non of the matters of art 110
2. POI's recommendation is not needed for introduction **but needed for consideration.**
3. rest == ordinary bills

### joint sitting
1. chaired by
	1. speaker 
	2. deputy speaker
	3. deputy chairman of RS
	4. person determined by the members present in JS
2. governed by rules of procedures of LS
3. quorum - 1/10th of total strength
4. generally new amendments can not be introduced except
	1. necessary due to delay
	2. amendments causing final disagreement.
### budget
1. art 112
2. contains - 
	1. estimates of revenue and capital receipts
	2. ways and means to raise revenue
	3. estimates of expenditure
	4. actual receipts in last yr and reasons for any deficit or surplus
	5. expenditure policies/programmes in the upcoming yr.
3. railway budget - till 2017
4. art 112 - POI shall cause  the annual financial statement to be laid down before both the houses
5. art 113 - no demand for grant except on the recommendation of POI
6. art 114 - no money shall be withdrawn from the CFI except for appropriation  by law.
7. ....
8. inclusion under FRBM act 2003
	1. macro economic framework statement
	2. fiscal policy strategy statement
	3. medium term fiscal policy statement
9. no amendments to the appropriation bill
10. amendments can be made in the finance bill
11. finance bill to be passed within 75 days.
#### cut motions
1. policy cut motions - rejection of the demand -> grant reduced to Re. 1
2. economy cut motion - grant reduced by specified amount
3. token cut motion - reduced **by** Rs. 100 
4. their passage may arise the want of parliamentary confidence...
#### vote on account
1. grant by LS to meet expenditure until the budget is passed
2. generally 1/6th of estimated expenditure.(for 2 months)
### charged expenditure on CFI
1. any amount to satisfy any judgement/award of a court / tribunal
2. debt charges of Govt, including interests..
3. any other expenditure as declared so, by the Parliament.

### grants
1. supplementary grant - when the money falls short for the financial year
2. additional grant - when need of money for a new service , not contemplated in the budget.
3. exceptional grant - for special causes, forms no part of the current services of any financial year.
4. excess grant - when expenditure on a service exceeded from what was estimated in the budget, before grant , it must be approved by PAC
5. token grant - when the need is transfer of money from one head to another, no  new appropriation, for expenditure of a new service.
6. **vote of credit** - to meet unexpected demands of resources, nature of demand -> indefininte, like a blank cheque, to the executive.
### Consolidated fund of india
1. all receipts and expenditures of a govt.
2. revenue, loans, etc.
3. no money except in accordance with a parliamentary law,
### public accounts of india
1. provident fund
2. judicial deposits
3. departmental deposits,
4. savings deposits...
5. managed by executive(no role of parliament)
### contingency fund of india
1. by finance secretary on behalf of the POI
2. managed by executive solely. 
### powers
1. parl. can regulate the organisation and jurisdiction of SC, HC, and provide for a common HC for two or more states.
### delegated legislation
1. parl. make laws in broader sense(skeleton), and leave the technicalities and regulations to the executive to be deliberated, this is called delegated legislation
### special powers of RS
1. authorising parliament to legislate on state subject laws(art 249)
2. authorize the creation of new All-India-services.(art 312)
### parl. privileges
1. AGI -> yes
2. POI - no
3. can not be arrensted while parliament is in session, +- 40 days., (only for civil cases and not for criminal / preventive detention)
4. they can refuse to be present  as witness / provide evidence in any case in the court when the house in in session.

### parliamentary committee
1. nominated/elected or appointed by the house or chairperson
2. submits its report to the house
3. has a secretariat provided by the house.
4. works under direction of the chairperson.
#### PAC
1. first 1921,
2. election - 
	1. 22(15+7)
	2. proportional representation 
	3. one yr membership
	4. no minister
	5. chairman appointed by the speaker from amongst the members(convention - opposition party)
3. functions  - review the report of CAG
	1. appropriation and finance accounts of govt and public undertakings
	2. state corporations, infra projects ... money spent.
	3. accounts of autonomous bodies, semi-auto..., the audit of which is done by CAG
	4. accounts of stores and stocks.
	5. assisted by CAG
	6. post mortem 
	7. legal, and forma  + economy, prudence, etc.
4. can not question the policy
5. advisory role, not binding
#### estimates committee
1. 30(all from LS)
2. proportional representation ....
3. one yr term
4. no minister
5. function - 
	1. look after the economy in the estimates proposed in the budget.
	2. suggest alternative policies to bring economy and efficiency in the admin.
	3. to suggest the form in which the estimates should be presented to the parl.
	4. to check whether the money is within the limits of policies
	5. can not look into matters of Pub. undertakings, of which PAC is doing stuff
6. lacks CAG assistance
7. only check the estimates, once they are voted, so post mortem
8. can not check all the budget estimates, only be able to do a portion in the whole yer
9. 
#### Committee on public undertaking
1. 1964(krishna menon committee)
2. members - 22(15 + 7)
3. no minister.
4. function - 
	1. to examine the accounts of public undertakings
	2. to examine CAG report on PU.
	3. to examine if the functions of PU are carried in the manner of sound biz practices...
5. can only examine for 10-15 PUs per year.
#### Department related committees
1. members - 31(21 + 10)
2. members nominated by the chairperson.
3. no minister.
4. function  - 
	1. consider the demand for grant. of the department.
	2. examine bills related to that department.
	3. consider annual report of the departments.

