---
tags:
  - "#Polity"
  - "#GS2"
se-interval: 1
se-last-reviewed: 2025-07-16T02:47:36
se-ease: 2.5
---
## Polity
### art 15
1. 1st CAA - for the advancement of socially and educatinoally BC. and scheduled castes and STs.
2. 93rd constitutional amendment 2005 - state is not prevented from making special provisions for (socially and educationally backwardd classes) their admission in educational institutions
3. 103rd CAA - economically backward classes and reservation upto 10% in educatinal institutions.
### art 16
1. equality in terms of opportunity in public employment
2. no discrimination on the basis of the religion, race, caste, sex . and place of birth.
3. residence as a requirement
4. scheduled castes and tribes. .. BCs
5. religion or denomination as a requirement for cetain employment in religious or denominational institution. 
6. upto 10 % reservation for the economically BCs.
7. in 1979 - mandal commission for identification of backward classes and recommendations for their advancement. 1980 report submitted and accepted
8. 1990 -  27% reservation for BC, 
9. 1991 -
	1. 10% reservation for eco weaker sections
	2. preference to poorer sections of the OBC class
10. indira sawhney case 1993 
	1. 27% -> valid
	2. 10% - invalid
	3. promotion - invalid
	4. carry forwardd - valid but should not violate the 50% rule
	5. creamy layer to be excluded.
	6. relaxation in qualifying marks - invalid due to art 335(admin efficiency)
11. Govt's responce
	1. National commission for backward classes
		1. 1993
		2.  to look into matters of over, under or non-inclusiono
		3. 102nd CAA - constitutional status
	2. Ram nandan committee to indentify the creamy layer.
	3. 77th CAA 1995 - reservations in promotions valid.(art 16(4A))
	4. 81st CAA 2000 - backlog vacancies carry forward(16(4B)) and inclusion of consequent seniority in 16(4A)
	5. 82nd CAA 2000 - relaxation in qualifying marks for backward classes(amended art 335)
	6. 103rd CAA 2019 - 10% to eco weaker section
### art 17
1. prevention of untoucahbility
2. 1976 - untouchability act 1955 -> Protection of civil rights act 1955.
### art 18 
1. prohibit the state from conferring any title to any individual
2. prohibits the citizen to accept any foreign title
3. any indian or foreigner holding office of profit  or trust under  india can not accept any title without prior permission form the POI
4. indina or foreigner holding.... can not accept any present, emolument or office from any foreign nation without the consent of fthe POI.
5. max numbers of padma awards in a yr - 120(- posthumously / NRI...)
6. max Bharat Ratna- 3 
### art 19
1. speech and expression
2. to assemble peacefully and without arms
3. to form associations, co-op(97th 2011)
4. to move freely
5. to reside 
6. to property(repealed 44th 1978)
7. to follow any occupation
	rest of the article clause 2 to 6...?? covers the restrictions on the rights
8. Anuradha Bhasin case 2020 - practice of any profession or occupation over internet is also protected under art 19(1)(g)
### art 21
1. gopalan case 1950
	1. right to life can be curtailed by a procedure established by law, 
	2. personal liberty means the individual or liberty of the body.
2. Menaka case 1978
	1. can only be curtailed by a law established by a procedure which complies to natural justice.
		1. reasonable , fair and just
	2. personal life and liberty not only include the animal existence of the individual but also the life with dignity.
3. hussainara khatoon vas home secretary, bihar -
	1. right to speedy trial
4. ks puttaswamy 
	1. right to privacy
### art 21A
1. 86th CAA 2002
	1. mandates the state to provide compulsory and free education to children of age 6 to 14(art 21A)
	2. endouver to provide early childhood care and education till the child attain the age of 6(amended form of at 45)
	3. funda. duty of a citizen to provide opportunities for education to ward of age 6-14
2. Right of children to free and compulsory edcuation act 2009(RTE act)

### art 22
1. two types of laws 
	1. ordinary 
	2. preventive detention laws
2. for ordinary laws
	1. right to be informed on the grounds of detention
	2. right to seek legal aid
	3. right to be produced before a magistrate within 24 hrs
	4. right to be released unless provided by the magistrate
3. for preventive detention laws
	1. max period of detention 3 months
	2. to be informed about the reason but details not in public interest can be kept secret
	3. after 3 months - if directed by an advisory board consisting of HC judges.
	4. detenu to be afforded the opportunity to seek legal aid / representation.
4. UAPA 1967 , amended - 2004, 2008, 2012, 2019

### art 23
1. prohibits human trafficing and forced labour
2. allows the state to compel any individual to render military or civil service even without remuneration, but state can not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, caste or class.
### art 24
1. prohibits employment of children below age 14 in mines, factories or any other hazardous place
2. does not prohibit employment in non-hazardous or innocent work
3. 2006 - govt banned the employment of children as domestic servants or workers in biz establishments like hotel dhabbas etc.
### art 25
1. right of inner conscience
2. right to profess, practice and propogate
3. state is permitted to - 
	1. regulate or restrict any social, economical, political or secular activity related to any religious practice 
	2. to provide for social welfare or reforms or throw open hindu religious institutions of public charater to all classes.
4. subject to public morality , health and other provisions for FRs.

### art 26
1. to form religious institutions or charitable trust
2. to manage its own affairs of relgious nature
3. to aquire property
4. to manage such property
5. this right is subject to only three limitatiion and not other FRs or limitation in general for FRs
	1. public order
	2. morality 
	3. health
### art 27
1. no tax for any religion
2. no use of tax money for the promotion of any particular religion -> can be used for promotion of all religions

### art 28
1. educational institutions 
	1. wholly maintained by the state
	2. maintained by the stated but established under any endowment of trust
	3. partially funded by the state
	4. recongnised by the state
2. in 1st category religious instructions are compoletely prohibited
3. in 2 it is permitted
4. in  3 and 4 permitted on voluntary basis

### art 29
1. any section of the society having its own distinct language, script or culture have the right to preserve it.
2. right not only to the minorities but also to other citizens
3. this include the right to perform agitation -> public speeches by politicians in this regard are not illegal under representation of people act 1951
4. no citizen can be denied admission in any educational institution maintained by the state or recieving aid from it, on the basis of race, religion, caste or language

### art 30
1. minorities can establish and administer their educational institutions
2. compensation for compulsory acquisition of property should not violate their rights
3. prohibit the state from discrimination for providing aid to such institutions
4. types of minority educational institutions - 
	1. seek recongnition and aid 
	2. seek recognition but not aid
	3. neither recognition nor aid
5. first two types are bound to govt laws and regulations for syllabus, educators etcc
6. third only subject to general laws like labour law...
### art 32
1. right to move supreme court for the violation of FRs
2. supreme court is empowered to issue orders, and writs in order to re-establish FRs of somenone...
3. parliament can confer this power of remedies for violation of FRs to any other court but can not abrogate SC's power
4. right to move SC can not be terminated except for provisions provided in the constitution -> can be in the case of national emergency(art 359)
5. it is part of the basic structure.
6. soul of the constitution -> B R ambedkar
### writ jurisdiction
1. SC  under art 32
	1. for protection of FRs
	2. binding
2. HC under art 226
	1. for protection of FRs as well as other matters
	2. discretionary.
### types of writs
1. habeas corpus 
	1. to have thee body of 
	2. can be issued against any individual as well as public institution
2. mandamus - 
	1. for mandating to take action in a certain manner
	2. to a public office
3. prohibition
	1. judicial writ, only to judicial or quasi judicial bodies
	2. by an upper court to prohibit a lower court from exceedind its jurisdiction
4. certiorari
	1. only to judicial or quasi judicial bodies
	2. by an upper court to restrict the award or verdict of a lower court or authority,  in a matter beyond its jurisdiction
5. quo-warranto - 
	1. meaning - by what authority
	2. issued to an individual for asking the authrity by which s/he claims to be a public office.
	3. issued only in case of a significant public office and not for a private office....
	4. can be demanded by any person of public welfare mindset and not necessarily by aggrieved person
### art 33
1. parliament is empowered to make laws to abridge the fundamental rights provided to individuals serving in armed forces., police forces...
2. such act may place court martial outside of the writ jurisdiction of the SC or HCs.
	1. army act 1950..
	2. SC declared that writ jurisdiction in such cases is very limited ...
### art 34 
1. when an area is under martial law, FRs are restricted.
2. parliament can validate any order, rule or punishment even infringing on FRs
3. martial law -> 
	1. not defined anywhere in the constitution 
	2. means admin managed by  military authorities according to their rules
	3. different from the military rule that governs armed forces.

### art 35
1. only parliament can make laws to enforce FRs under art  16, 32, 33, and 34
2. for the punishment of offences under FRs art 17 and art 23
### status of right to property
1. initially under article 19(1)(f) and artcle 31
2. now both the articles are deleted (44th CAA)
3. inclusion of 300A(right to property) <- 44th CAA
### exception of FR's applicability
#### art 31A
1. added by 1st CAA
2. no state law can be challenged on the ground that it violate art 14 which give effect to -
	1. acquisition of estates and related rights
	2. management of corporations
	3. termination or modification of mining leases.
#### art 31B
1. added by 1st CAA
2. no law included in the 9th schedule can be termed unconstitutional on the grounds that it violate any of the FRs
3. keshavanand bharti case 1973
	1. any law included in the 9th schedule after 24th april 1973 are open to judicial review and valid only if they do not violate the basic structure of the consti.
#### art 31C
1. added by 25th 1971
	1. any act enacted for implementation of art 39B and 39C can not be termed unconstitutional on the grounds that it violate the FRs under art 14 and 19
	2. any act that claims to give effect to a policy can not be termed invalid on the grounds that it does not give effect to that policy
2. keshavanad bharti case -> 2nd provision is invalid while 1st is valid.
3. 42nd CAA - extended the 1st provision to any of the DPSPs
4. Minerwa mills case 1980 -> this extension -> unconstitutional.