---
tags:
  - "#Polity"
  - "#GS2"
  - review
se-interval: 1
se-last-reviewed: 2025-07-16T02:47:36
se-ease: 2.5
---
## Polity
### DPSP
1. art 36 - 51
2. 36 - define the state
3. 37 - non-justiciable nature of the DPSPs
4. 38 - welfare state
5. 39 - 
	1. citizens, men and women all have equal opportunities of livelihood
	2. ownership and control of material resources of the community are distributed to best serve the common good of the people
	3. prevent concentration of wealth and means of productions
	4. equal pay for equal work for both men and women
	5. health and strength of workers, children are not abused. citizens are not forced to enter vocations not fit for their age and strength out of economic necessity
	6. children are given opportunities and facitlities to develop in a healthy envt. childhood and youth protected against exploitation
6. 39A - equal justice and free legal aid(42nd CAA)
7. 40 - village panchayats
8. 41 - right to work, education and public assistance in case of disability, old-age...
9. 42 - just and humane work conditions and maternity relief.
10. 43 - secure living wage and cultural opportunities for the workerss
11. 43A - ensure participation of workers in the management of industries(42nd)
12. 43B - promotion of voluntary establishment, democratic ownership and professional management of co-operative societies(97th 2011)
13. 44 - UCC
14. 45 - to endevour for providing early childhood care and education to children till they attain age of 6
15. 46 - Promotion of educational and economic interests of SC, ST and other weaker sections
16. 47 - prevent the use of intoxicating drinks and drugs, promote health and nutritious food.
17. 48 - organisation of agri and animal welfare
18. 48A - envt protection and forest and wildlife
19. 49 - protection of monuments and places of national importance
20. 50 - separate the judiciary and the executive in the public services
21. 51- promote international peace and arbitration-led conflict resolution.
### DPSP vs FRs
#### Champakam durairajan case 1951
1. FR > DPSP
2. but FR can be amended by constitutional amendments
1st CAA....
#### Golaknath case 1967
1. parliament can not take away any of the FRs, as they are sacrosanct in nature
24th CAA 1971 - paliament has the power to abridge any FR, by constitutional amendment
25th CAA 1971 - 31C(art 39(b) and (c) > art 14 19 and 31) and law can not be questioned in any court on the ground that it does not give effect to the said policy.
#### Keshwanand Bharti case 1973
1. basic structure...
2. 2nd provision of 25th CAA invalidated
42nd CAA - extended the first part of the 25th CAA(31C) to all of the DPSP
#### minerva mills case 1980
1. extension of art 31C by 42nd CAA - invalidated.

### Directives outside part 4
1. claims of SCs and STs to the services are to fulfilled while maintaining the admin efficiency(335)
2. minority children - primary education in mother tongue - art 350 A
3. promotion of Hindi (351)
### Fundamental duties
part 4A, art 51A, 42nd CAA 1976
1. to abide by the constitution and respect its ideals, national flag and anthem
2. to cherish and follow the noble ideals that inspired the freedom struggle of the country
3. to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of india
4. to defend the nation and render national service when called upon so.
5. to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood. renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women.
6. to value and preserve the rich heritage of the composite culture of india
7. to protect and improve natural envt and compassion for living creatures
8. to develop scientific temper, humanism and  spirit of inquiry and reform
9. to safegaurd public property and abjure violence
10. to strive towards excellence in every sphere of life...
11. to provide opportunities to ward (6-14) for education.(86th CAA 2002)

### basic structure of the constitution
 evolved in keshavanand bharti case 1973.
1. Indira sawhney case 1992 - rule of law.
2. kihoto hollohan case (defection case ) 1992 - free and fair elections
3. SR bommai case 1994 - federalism
4. IR coelho case 2007 - separation of powers, judicial review...
### cases related to basic struc.
#### Shankari prasad case 1951
1. challenged the 1st CAA
2. SC ->
	1. constitutional amendments can change FRs
	2. term "law" in art 13 refers to ordianary laws and not CAAs
#### Golak nath case 1967
1. Parliament can not amend FRs under art 368.
2. CAA is also a law under article 13
3.  24th CAA 1971 ->
	1. parliament can amend any FRs by CAA 
	2. such CAA will not be treated as "law" under art 13
#### Keshavanand Bharti case 1973
1. parliament can amend any part of the constitution while not affecting the basic structure of the constitution.
2. 42nd CAA - 
	1. there is no limits to the amending power of the parl.
	2. no consti. amendment can be questioned in any court on anny grounds including that it violates FR.
#### minerva mills case 1980
1. both of the above amendments invalid. as limited power of the parliament is a part of the basic structure of the constitution and parliament can not expand this power using the very same power.
#### waman rao case 1980
1. doctrine of basic sturc. will apply on the CAs enacted after 24th april 1973.

### Art 74 
1. there shall be a council of ministers headed by PM to aid and advise the president
2. this advise is binding on the POI(42nd and 44th CAA 1976,78)
### Art 75
1. Council of ministers is collectively responsible to the parliament in general and LS in particular.
similarly for state art 163 and 164

### territorial extent of legislative power
1. centre can make extra territorial laws i.e. laws on citizens in foreign and their property...
2. state laws may have extra-territorial implementation/recognition if there is a sufficient nexus between the state and the object
relating to UTs
3. center can make regulations for UTs of j&K, ladakh, Dadra and nagar haveli and daman and diu, lakshadweep and Andman& nicobar islands. ...
4. for puduchery also if its legislature is suspended or dissolved.
special cases
5. Governor can declare any parliamentary law to be non-applicable for any scheduled area in the state
6. governor of assam can direct that any act of parl. does not apply to a tribal area in the state
similarly POI can declare for meghalaya, tripura and mijoram

### distribution of powers
1. union list -
	1. banking
	2. insurance 
	3. census
2. state list
	1. public order
	2. public health and sanitation
	3. theater, gambling ..
3. concurrent list
	1. criminal and civil law and procedure
	2. marriage and divorce
	3. population control
	4. drugs
	5. printing press...
	6. 42nd CAA
		1. education
		2. forest
		3. weights and measures
		4. protection of wild animals and birds
		5. admin of justice, constitution and organisation of all courts except SC and HC
	7. state law may prevail over central law if the state law was reserved for POI's assent and recieved assent.
### paliamentary legislation in state field
1. RS resolution - 
	1. when RS passes a resolution with 2/3rd majority of present and voting for this. (art 249)
	2. such a resolution is operational for max one yr 
	3. but can be renewed any number of time for max. one yr at once.
	4. law cease to have effect after 6 months of expiry of the resolution
2. national emergency(art 352) -> art 250
	1. state not deprived of its powers
	2. but in case of conflict, central law prevails.
	3. such law becomes inoperative after 6 months of expiry of the National emergency
3. President's rule(art 356)
	1. state legislature is deprived of its legislative powers
	2. such law remain operative even after the President's rule ceases.
	3. such law can be repealed or amended ... by state legislature when PR is repugnated
4. two states - (art 252)
	1. when two or more state legislature passes resolution asking the centre to legislate on a matter of state list for both of them
	2. only applies to those states, 
	3. other state may join in , by passing appropriate resolution
	4. states are deprived of making law on the subjects.
5. to implement international agreements.(art 253)

### center's control over state legislation
1. governor may reserve the central legislations for POI's consideration and POI have absolute veto for it, even in second instance.(200 and 201)
2. center can direct the governor for reserving a money or financial bill for president's consideration in case of a financial emergency(360)
3. a bill dealing with restriction on inter or intra state trade can only be introduced by a state legislature with prior sanction of the POI(304)
4. governor may be required to get prior instructions from the POI in some special cases of issuing ordinances.(213)
	1. if the same law, when introduced by the state legislature would have required POI's instructions
	2. if governor would need to reserve such a bill for the POI's considereation
### distribution of executive powers
1. generally on the line of legislative powers
2. but in case of concurrent list -> the power to execute, by default lies with state, unless specifically provided by a central law(ordinary or CA)
3. states are obliged to exercise their executive powers such that
	1. it complies with the parliamentary laws
	2. it does not abridge the executive powers of the centre
	3. center can give directions for this purpose to the states
	4. under art 365, if states fail to comply with the directions, governor may hold that govt in the state can not be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the constituion.
